The first trimester of pregnancy
is a miraculous time,
as a single cell develops
into an embryo and then a fetus.
After conception occurs,
a single cell divides to form a
cluster of cells that travels to the uterus
and implants itself in the lining.
This marks the beginning of
what is called the embryonic stage,
which lasts through the eighth week
after conception, or tenth week of pregnancy.
The astonishing process of human
development continues
as the rapidly dividing cells
within the sphere organize into a disc,
which folds into three layers.
Simultaneously, each layer will develop into many
tissues, organs, and structures,
while the surrounding environment will also change
to nourish, protect, and support this development.
A groove forms down the center of the disk,
which now has a top and bottom,
front and back, and left and right side.
This neural groove deepens
and then forms a tube,
which develops into the brain and spinal cord.
An early circulatory system develops
from tubes on the left
and right side of the groove.
The tubes merge, kink, and fuse together
to form the chambers of the heart,
which will begin to beat and pump blood.
The central nervous system is also developing.
The neural groove closes like a zipper,
forming a tube that becomes
the spinal cord and brain.
The closing is faster toward the head end,
as the different parts of the brain develop.
The ends of the groove then close.
Other organs such as the liver begin to develop.
Arm and leg buds appear.
To support this growth,
nutrients come from the mother
through the placenta via the umbilical cord.
The arms and legs continue to grow,
with paddle-like shapes where the hands and feet will be.
The hands and feet continue to develop,
and soon the arm can bend at the elbows.
Fingers and toes appear.
Facial features start to appear
as the brain grows to support
the senses, such as vision and hearing.
The intestines also develop,
first projecting into the umbilical cord
outside the body
and then inside the abdomen.
Muscles and bones begin to develop.
The position of the limbs moves
from the center to the side,
and the knees take shape in the legs.
As development continues,
facial features become more refined.
All the organs are developing.
Some, such as the liver and thyroid,
are already functioning.
By the end of the first trimester,
the developing baby is a miniature person.